            safety
Article
Performance-Based Fire Engineering Design of a
Heritage Building: McDougall House Case Study
Dennis Pau 1, * , Christine Duncan 2 and Charles Fleischmann 1
 1    Department of Civil and Natural Resources Engineering, University of Canterbury,
      Christchurch 8140, New Zealand
 2    Norman Disney & Young, Wellington 6011, New Zealand
 *    Correspondence: dennis.pau@canterbury.ac.nz; Tel.: +64-21-182-6058
                                                                                                     
 Received: 6 June 2019; Accepted: 12 July 2019; Published: 17 July 2019                              


 Abstract: The application of a performance-based fire engineering design has enabled the conservation
 of a heritage building in New Zealand. McDougall House is a two-story heritage building which
 suffered extensive damages during the Canterbury earthquakes in 2010 and 2011. The scope of
 the conservation plan included the preservation and restoration of the building external façade,
 the restoration of the ornamental plasterwork ceiling within the Ballroom, the reconstruction of all
 damaged internal lath and plaster linings, the adaptation of the fireplace, and the reconstruction
 of the damaged chimney. The fire engineering design adopted is the Verification Method C/VM2
 with As Nearly As is Reasonably Practicable consideration for the heritage fabrics of the building.
 The combination of quantitative and qualitative analyses has demonstrated the building design
 compliance with the 10 design scenarios of C/VM2. These analyses include the assessment of
 minimum means of escape and fire protection provisions, the assessment of allowable unprotected
 areas in the external wall for horizontal fire spread, the assessment of firefighting provisions, the
 smoke and egress modelling of proposed design fires, and the benefit versus sacrifice analysis on the
 heritage fabrics. The application of C/VM2 results in an upgrade to the fire safety and fire protection
 systems of the building while also retaining and enhancing its heritage value.

 Keywords: cultural heritage; performance-based fire engineering design; fire protection design; zone
 smoke modelling; required safe egress time; available safe egress time




1. Introduction
     Heritage buildings represent the intrinsic fabric of a society that amass historical values over
time, conveying invaluable information from the past to the present and future communities. The
accrued cultural heritage values are the identity of the society in relation to its ancestors and are also a
measure of the achievement of the current community [1]. The construction of heritage buildings is
often unconventional when compared to the current standard of practice [2] also with on-going use and
the associated conservation process, which would require the buildings to be assessed according to the
current building regulatory requirements. Therefore, it is vitally important to ensure that the cultural
heritage values intertwining the past, present and future are not lost in the process of complying with
the building regulations. This presents a rather unique challenge from the fire engineering perspective.
The International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS)’s New Zealand Charter [1] outlines
the conservation principles of heritage places, including buildings and landscapes. The approach
comprises preservation, restoration, reconstruction and adaptation with emphasis on minimizing loss
or damage to the heritage values.
     This paper presents the details of the performance-based fire engineering design for a heritage
building in New Zealand, the McDougall House [3]. The two-story, Arts and Crafts, Queen Anne and


Safety 2019, 5, 45; doi:10.3390/safety5030045                                     www.mdpi.com/journal/safety
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                      2 of 23



Classical architecture-styled building is located at 24 McDougall Avenue, in the suburb of Merivale,
Christchurch [4]. The building originally named Fitzroy was designed by local architects, the England
Brothers, and constructed in 1898 as the residential home for Robert Ewing McDougall. Since then,
the building has undergone a number of prominent changes, listed chronologically: the addition of
southern Ballroom in 1913, the enclosing of external verandas with bay windows and the addition
of eastern gable before 1932, and the replacement of the original turret with gable between 1930s
and 1940s. In 1949, McDougall House was gifted to Nurse Maude Association. Following some
alterations, including the addition of multiple external fire stairs from the first floor, the building had a
change of use to operate as a convalescent home from 1950. McDougall House had another change of
use in 1964, from the hospital accommodation to an administration center for the association. The
last pre-earthquake major renovation was in 1993 during which the fire escape stairs were removed.
Following the 2010 and 2011 Canterbury earthquakes, major conservation was carried out from 2013 to
2015. Figure 1 shows the physical changes of the building by comparing the original building exterior
in 1898 with the current completed in 2015.




      Figure 1. Exterior appearance of McDougall House: (a) Original western elevation in 1898 reproduced
      with permission (Fitzroy, a house on Papanui Road, Christchurch. Ref: 1/2-074020-G. Alexander
      Turnbull Library, Wellington, New Zealand. https://natlib.govt.nz/records/22764051); (b) Current
      western elevation upon completion of refurbishment in 2015.

      Currently, the newly refurbished McDougall House remains as the office and business
administration center of Nurse Maude Association, the primary focus of which is the nursing,
homecare and health support of patients. This paper discusses the qualitative and quantitative
methodologies applied as part of the performance-based fire engineering design of McDougall House
in line with its heritage conservation plan. A summary of the fire engineering design was previously
presented in a conference proceeding [5] and this paper is an expansion of the former.

2. Earthquake Damages and Conservation of McDougall House
     According to the earthquake assessment report [6], prior to the earthquakes, McDougall House
was a timber-framed structure with timber weatherboard as exterior cladding and timber shingles as
roofing. Internally, the wall and ceiling linings were predominantly a lath and plaster construction
with a small amount of plasterboard linings, and the first floor was a timber joist construction. Between
2010 and 2011, McDougall House experienced two earthquakes and numerous aftershocks. The first
earthquake was on 4 September 2010 with a depth of 10 km and a magnitude of 7.1, generating 1.26 g
of peak ground acceleration. The resulting damages to the building included significant damage to a
reasonable number of lath and plaster walls which have inherently inferior bracing capacity. Minor
cracking was also noted to the ceiling, first floor and chimneys, and there was misalignment in the
ground floor level. In an effort to secure the chimneys, the portion within and above the roof was
removed subsequently. The second earthquake occurred on 22 February 2011, with a depth of 5 km
and a magnitude of 6.2, generating 2.20 g of peak ground acceleration. This time, there were extensive
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                       3 of 23



damage to the already weakened lath and plaster walls and floors from the prior earthquake and
aftershocks. The damages were more severe towards the west end of the building due to the presence
of the two chimneys, which added more seismic mass during the shakes, and this was amplified by a
lack of bracing walls within that area of the building. The chimneys were badly damaged and have to
be removed due to the imminent risk of collapse. Figure 2 shows some examples of these internal
damages throughout the building.




      Figure 2. Typical interior damages throughout McDougall House: (a) Damages on lath and plaster
      walls; (b) Section of a removed chimney; (c) Cracked ornamental plasterwork ceiling in the Ballroom;
      (d) Damages on a composite lath and plaster wall with heritage timber linings.

      The heritage survey [4] identified a number of exterior and interior building elements of cultural
heritage significance. Externally, as seen in Figure 1, these included the original feature windows,
gables and associated pediments, eave and ornate brackets, veranda columns and balustrades, balcony
details, shingled roofs, and timber weatherboard and timber tile cladding with original exterior trims.
Internally, there was significant utilization of heritage timber features such as skirting, paneling,
trims, post and beam structure, arch, doors and stairs, and a few ornamental heritage plasterwork,
particularly the Ballroom’s ceiling which was with coved cornice and a number of ceiling roses
distributed throughout. Despite the severity of the shakes, the external damages were cosmetic only
and did not require significant repairs or replacements. However, the internal heritage damages were
more significant. The removal of two badly damaged chimneys and associated fireplaces constituted
an irreparable loss of heritage significance as seen in Figure 2b. The ornamental plasterwork ceiling
within the Ballroom was cracked as seen in Figure 2c, requiring delicate restoration.
      Besides earthquake damages, a preliminary review on the services of McDougall House revealed
that the ventilation, hydraulic and electrical systems will require an upgrade to comply with the current
New Zealand Building Code (NZBC) requirements. Similarly, in regards to fire safety, the addition of
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                             4 of 23



new fire protection systems and upgrade to the existing will be needed to achieve an acceptable level
of fire safety for McDougall House. These included repair to damaged walls and floors, including
vertical voids left by the removed chimneys which compromised the fire resistance rating and smoke
stopping capability of these elements. A number of existing fire protection systems were also deemed
intrusive, detracting the heritage importance of the building, such as exposed sprinkler pipework
and heads under the ornamental plasterwork ceiling noted in Figure 2c, and an exposed fire hose reel
mounted on the wall. Some fire protection technologies were considered obsolete by current standards
such as brass pendant sprinkler heads, bell-type sounders, doors with Georgian wired glass, outdated
emergency lighting with limited coverage and reflective exit signage. While fire-stopping of service
penetrations through fire-rated construction is currently considered as a standard practice, at the time
of the last renovation in 1993, this was relatively unknown. Thus, McDougall House has a number
of untreated services penetrations throughout, resulting in incomplete fire and smoke separations
where required.
      The conservation strategy adopted has an in-depth consideration of the building’s cultural heritage
importance, in line with International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) conservation
principles to maintain the authenticity and integrity of McDougall House. The building’s foundation
was strengthened with hundreds of new piles and a few ground beams, and the timber-framed structure
was supported by additional steel and timber bracing frames throughout. Externally, the proposed
refurbishment included restored veranda decking on the northern elevation, new exterior paving
and landscape along the eastern elevation, a new southern entry and restored western entry of the
Ballroom, the replacement of damaged weatherboards and the application of new paint. Internally, the
layout of a few offices and stores at the ground and first floor were revised. There were also alterations
to the existing toilets and additions of new ones. The fireplace and chimney within the Boardroom
were sealed while a new fireplace and associated chimney shaft were adapted for the Ballroom. The
extensively damaged lath and plaster walls were replaced with either plasterboard on an existing lath
substrate or on new timber frame, or as a composite wall of heritage timber panels on lath and plaster
with mineral wool in the cavity on one side and new plasterboard wall on the other. The new floor
ceiling system was plasterboard on timber joist floor, replacing the damaged lath and plaster. On
pre-earthquake floor plans, Figure 3 highlights the proposed alterations, where red and green colors
denote the external and internal works, respectively.




      Figure 3. Proposed alterations for the conservation of McDougall House: (a) Ground floor; (b) First floor.

     At the completion of the refurbishment, the building layout remained similar in essence to how it
was pre-earthquake. Figure 4 shows the current floor plan of both floors with the expected occupant
distribution, the designated exits and the demarcation of fire and smoke separations. Some information
relates to the outcomes of the performance-based fire engineering design, which will be elaborated
in the subsequent sections. The ground floor comprises a number of partitioned offices and meeting
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                     5 of 23



rooms, Ballroom, Boardroom and miscellaneous spaces such as stores, kitchen and toilets. This level is
served by a number of final exits which lead directly to the outside carpark and linkway. A partitioned
corridor interconnects the ground spaces to the two stairs serving the first floor located at opposite
ends of the corridor. These are open feature stairs with a main ground lobby and an enclosed stair. The
first floor contains additional office spaces with a kitchen and toilets. This upper level has a single
means of escape for fire safety via the enclosed stair with the open feature stair for convenient access
only. The enclosed stair is bounded by the fire separation with smoke stopping capability, indicated by
the red line, while the open feature stair is smoke separated at the first floor by the smoke separation
indicated by the cyan line. Based on the floor area and occupant densities for the designated use of the
spaces throughout [7], the total occupant load of McDougall House is 95 with 79 and 16 at ground and
first floor, respectively.




                     Figure 4. Current layout of McDougall House: (a) Ground floor; (b) First floor.

3. Building Control System within New Zealand
      In New Zealand, the Building Act 2004 [8] is the mandatory building control framework within
the country which governs the building design and construction process. The aims are to improve
the control of building design and construction practice, to ensure the health and safety of building
occupants, and to promote sustainable development. A few sections of the Building Act provide clarity
on the minimum fire safety requirements for a building, according to its status and use. First, Section
17 states that all building work, including fire safety, must comply with the NZBC and this provides an
overarching provision covering major work such as a new built and also minor ones not requiring a
building consent. Second, Section 112 specifically addresses alterations to existing buildings where,
after alterations, the means of escape from fire needs to comply with NZBC provisions or on a As
Nearly As is Reasonably Practicable (ANARP) basis. Lastly, Section 115 covers buildings undergoing
change of use, where a building under its new use will comply with every fire safety provision of
the NZBC or on an ANARP basis. These include the means of escape from fire, protection of other
property and fire rating performance. Change of use triggers more considerations on various aspects
of fire safety when compared to alterations to the existing building only.
      For McDougall House, Nurse Maude Association is retaining the existing building’s use as office
and business administration. Therefore, the proposed alterations for McDougall House are covered
by Section 112, requiring the building after alterations to comply ANARP with NZBC in terms of
means of escape from fire. In addition, the aspects relating to the protection of other property and
fire rating performance were also considered by the fire engineering design. Protection of other
property was reviewed due to the close proximity of McDougall House’s southern elevation to an
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                   6 of 23



adjacent hospital, visible on the right side of Figure 1b. The hospital contains sleeping use and the
alterations for McDougall House’s new southern entry means the risk of fire spread has changed. Thus,
a reassessment of the radiation exposure to boundary during fire is required. As mentioned in the
previous section, the extensive earthquake damages to the wall and floor ceiling systems means the
fire and smoke stopping performance were compromised. Thus, the fire resistance rating requires
reassessment to specify suitable repairs or new systems. The ANARP provision requires the altered
building to continue to comply with NZBC as before or, if it did not comply originally, the alterations
will continue to comply with at least the same extent as before. For proposed alterations which do not
meet NZBC, Section 112 also allows the territorial authority to permit such alterations if these result
in improvements to the building, the improvements outweigh the adverse effects of not complying
with NZBC, and if otherwise, such improvements would not occur. This allows some latitudes in the
fire engineering design of existing cultural heritage buildings where reasonably justified deviations
from the minimum NZBC requirements can be considered, provided the level of fire safety does not
diminish following the alterations.
      To meet the fire safety requirements of the Building Act, the building’s fire engineering design
needs to comply with NZBC’s C1–C6 clauses, Protection from Fire [9]. The objectives of C clauses are
to safeguard the people from unacceptable risk of injury or illness caused by fire, protect neighboring
property from damage caused by fire, and facilitate firefighting and rescue operation. These objectives
are satisfied by achieving the various performance criteria specific to each C clause which contains
a few functional requirements in general, such as reducing the likelihood of fire occurring via
control of common building appliances, reducing the likelihood for internal and external fire spread,
providing effective means of escape to facilitate evacuation in event of a fire, providing adequate
firefighting provisions to facilitate fire service operation, and providing structural systems with adequate
performance under conditions caused by fire. To demonstrate that the functional requirements and
specific performance criteria are met, there are two types of design solutions: the prescriptive Acceptable
Solutions [10] and the performance-based fire engineering design.
      The prescriptive Acceptable Solutions C/AS1-C/AS7 often impose constraining design limitations
when applied to existing cultural heritage buildings. From a fire safety perspective, typical design
constraints include inadequate escape route characteristics, lack of fire and smoke stopping capability,
unknown fire resistance rating of structural elements and unknown combustibility of surface linings.
This is because the architectural features and construction materials predate many of the current design
and construction practices, and there is also a lack of standard testing carried out to establish the
performance of heritage building elements. The application of C/AS5 for McDougall House poses a
challenge with the open feature stair which interconnects the ground and first floor. The first floor is
considered as an intermediate floor due to the lack of fire and smoke separations surrounding the main
ground lobby and at the top of the stair. As the size of the first floor exceeds the maximum allowable
floor area of an intermediate floor in C/AS5, the prescribed solution would require forming the main
ground lobby and feature stair as a firecell, separating from the adjacent ground and first floor spaces
by fire- and smoke-rated constructions. This is not acceptable for the conservation plan because the
installation of fire-rated walls and doors would result in the extensive removal of heritage timber
linings. This solution remains costly, offers little value in terms of aesthetics, and yet significantly
diminishes the heritage value of the building.
      On the other hand, a performance-based fire engineering design approach offers more design
flexibility to meet the requirements of NZBC C1-C6. Available options include Verification Method
C/VM2 [7] and Alternative Solution. C/VM2 was developed based on New Zealand building stocks
with the aim of ensuring greater consistency and certainty in fire engineering design at lower cost
through a more efficient design and approval process. It is a fire safety design framework which
prescribes a number design fire scenarios, design inputs and minimum performance outcomes in
quantitative terms, allowing the designer to apply appropriate knowledge and modelling tools to assess
the building’s fire safety performance such as smoke transport, occupant evacuation and radiation
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                    7 of 23



to boundary or target. Despite having prescriptive requirements, C/VM2 still permits flexibility and
innovation in building design whilst its level of complexity differentiates it from the fully prescriptive
Acceptable Solution. From an approval perspective, the quantitative nature of the performance
outcomes means the territorial authority can effectively regulate the fire safety level of buildings
without having to assess the expected fire losses on a building-by-building basis.
      Most building codes provide qualitative objectives so the selection of performance criteria and
design fire scenarios for Alternative Solution are quantified by the designer and approved by the
territorial authority to establish the level of fire safety. Traditionally, Alternative Solution covers the
parts of building design which fail to meet the prescriptive solution as a variation showing compliance
by means of engineering analysis. Wade et al. [11] and Fleischmann [12] have d the common challenges
encountered with Alternative Solution and the primary concerns are the inconsistent application of fire
engineering and interpretation of fire safety level for essentially similar building occupancy. As a result,
these building designs can vary considerably in terms of the fire safety and fire protection features
incorporated due to the significant variations in design fire scenarios, design fires and performance
criteria assessed. These complicate and delay the design, construction and approval process with
adverse impacts on innovation and cost. Furthermore, many areas of Alternative Solution need further
research such as the development of design fire scenarios by deterministic or probabilistic means, the
improvement of design fire characteristics including species production, the representation of occupant
response and evacuation in fire, and the selection and evaluation of performance criteria such as the
fractional effective dose (FED).
      This highlights the evolving development in fire engineering and the suited application of
Alternative Solution to buildings with special uses or unusual features, such as transportation tunnel,
underground subway station and skyscraper. These buildings are outside the scope of C/VM2 where
the prescribed inputs no longer apply, and additional engineering considerations are required. A few
international guidelines including NFPA 101, IFEG and CIBSE Guide E [13–15] provide different levels
of details and approaches for fire engineering. At the time of writing, there have been on-going efforts
to improve the application of Alternative Solution in New Zealand. For McDougall House, C/VM2
was chosen as the design approach due to the simplified building consent process, given the inherently
accepted design fire scenarios, design inputs and minimum performance outcomes.

4. Application of Verification Method C/VM2 to McDougall House
      C/VM2 presents 10 design scenarios that address various fire safety aspects of a building and
assess the fire engineering design for the adequacy of means of escape, the performance of active and
passive fire protection systems, the ability to limit internal and external fire spread, the provisions
to facilitate firefighting and rescue operation, and the redundancy of fire protection systems. The
description, performance outcome and compliance solution of each design scenario applicable to the
fire engineering design of McDougall House are presented in the following subsections. The fire
engineering design comprises quantitative assessments utilizing conventional engineering tools and
also qualitative assessments, including benefit versus sacrifice analysis, particularly in relation to
cultural heritage aspect.

4.1. Design Scenario (BE): Fire Blocks Exit
      This design scenario applies to escape routes serving more than 50 people or with a single direction
of travel where an escape route may be blocked due to the proximity of fire source. It requires a single
means of escape to serve no more than 50 people, with a maximum length of 50 m if the occupant
characteristics are considered as familiar with the building. This is the case for McDougall House with
Nurse Maude employees. For up to 250 occupants, to be classified as having two means of escape,
the escape routes have to diverge at a minimum 90◦ until separated by at least 8 m apart and remain
separated at the final exits. This design scenario is analyzed qualitatively by reviewing the means of
escape of McDougall House. The ground floor has 79 occupants served by a minimum of two escape
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                 8 of 23



routes, which achieve at least 8 m separation as seen in Figure 4a. On the first floor, 16 occupants
are served by a single means of escape via the enclosed stair with a measured travel distance to the
fire-rated stair of 23 m, which is less than 50 m. On these bases, the building design satisfies Design
Scenario (BE).

4.2. Design Scenario (UT): Fire in Normally Unoccupied Room Threathening Occupants of Other Rooms
      This design scenario applies to spaces protected by an automatic detection and alarm system
containing more than 150 occupants that could be threatened by a fire occurring in another normally
unoccupied space such as services plant room and store. The design scenario considers the fire growing
to a significant size undetected, spreading to other spaces with a larger occupant load. The design
scenario requires adequate means of containment or suppression as solution. This design scenario
is analyzed qualitatively by reviewing the fire protection systems of McDougall House. As part of
the fire engineering design, McDougall House is protected by automatic smoke detection and alarm
system, installed to NZS 4512:2010 [16]. The total occupant load of the building is 95, less than the
threshold of 150. Thus, on this basis, the building design satisfies Design Scenario (UT).

4.3. Design Scenario (CS): Fire Starts in a Concealed Space
     This design scenario applies to spaces containing more than 50 occupants that could be threatened
by a fire within the concealed spaces such as roof, ceiling and subfloor cavities containing combustibles
or with the smallest dimension exceeding 0.8 m. The design scenario considers the fire developing
undetected, spreading to other spaces with larger occupant load. This design scenario requires
adequate means of containment, detection or suppression as solution. This design scenario is analyzed
qualitatively by reviewing the fire protection systems of McDougall House. As part of the fire
engineering design, McDougall House is protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system, installed
to NZS 4541:2013 [17]. The sprinkler system coverage includes the roof and ceiling spaces, with the
exception of the subfloor space having a depth of no more than 0.8 m and containing no combustibles.
The sprinkler system would detect heat generation and confine the fire to the space of origin. Thus, on
this basis, the building design satisfies Design Scenario (CS).

4.4. Design Scenario (SF): Smouldering Fire
     This design scenario considers a slow smoldering fire threatening the sleeping occupants.
As McDougall House is an office and business administration center, it contains no sleeping use. Thus,
on this basis, the building design satisfies Design Scenario (SF).

4.5. Design Scenario (HS): Horizontal Fire Spread
     This design scenario considers a fully developed fire in the building generating high levels of
radiation across a relevant boundary onto the external wall of neighboring building or firecell, which
could be other property, sleeping occupancy or fire separated escape route, also known as exitway.
This design scenario is analyzed quantitatively by reviewing the size of the allowable unprotected
areas (UPAs) in the external wall, specifically the new southern entry of McDougall House. External
wall areas exceeding the allowable unprotected areas will need to be suitably fire-rated to prevent fire
spread across the boundary. The proposed work for the new southern entry into the Ballroom included
a new entry located at 1.3 m from the notional boundary of the adjacent hospital, and a portion of
the reconstructed original weatherboard external wall at 2.0 m set back from the entry. By definition,
in NZBC, notional boundary is a boundary that exists between two buildings on the same property
under a single land title considered for fire safety and taken as 1.0 m from the external wall of the
building receiving radiation. Figure 5 shows the distance to the adjacent hospital and the elevation of
the proposed work for the new southern entry.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                                    9 of 23




      Figure 5. Quantitative assessment of horizontal fire spread across boundary for the new southern
      entry of McDougall House: (a) Distance to the adjacent hospital; (b) Proposed work for the new
      southern entry.

     The methodology applied is the tabulated values in C/VM2 Commentary [18], which considers
the distance to notional boundary (DB ), the fire load energy density (FLED) based on building use, and
the height and width of the unprotected areas (H and W). These parameters determine the maximum
allowable unprotected areas to mitigate the risk of horizontal fire spread. Based on information in
Figure 5 and for an office occupancy, the parameters evaluated and the maximum allowable unprotected
areas for the new entry and the reconstructed wall portion are presented in Table 1.

      Table 1. Parameters evaluated and maximum allowable unprotected areas for new southern entry of
      McDougall House.

                               Notional              Fire Load Energy          Height and Width of
     External Wall           Boundary (DB )           Density (FLED)          the Unprotected Areas          UPA 1 (%)
                                 (m)                      (MJ/m2 )                 (H × W) (m)
     New entry                      1.3                      800                         3×3                     90
 Reconstructed wall                 3.3                      800                        3 × 10                  100
                     1 Doubled allowable unprotected areas (UPAs) due to presence of sprinkler protection.



     From the tabulated values, the original allowable UPAs totals 45% for the new entry and 51%
for the reconstructed wall. With sprinkler protection, these values are doubled as shown in Table 1
as the benefit of installing suppression system. Therefore, the reconstructed wall can remain fully
unprotected while further analysis is required for the new entry. The actual size of the new entry is
2.5 × 3.0 m, giving an area of 7.4 m2 . This is less than the actual size of the allowable UPA, which is
90% of 3.0 × 3.0 m, 8.1 m2 . Hence, the new entry can also remain fully unprotected. The remaining
external walls of McDougall House have been restored with new paintwork and the replacement
of damaged weatherboard. The complete reassessment of the risk of fire spread across boundary
for these remaining walls is not deemed necessary as the level of risk which existed originally has
not changed following the refurbishment. This is an example of Section 112 provisions, whereby the
alterations made have complied with NZBC to at least the same extent as before, resulting in beneficial
improvements to the building.
     This design scenario is also analyzed qualitatively by reviewing the fire performance of the
external wall cladding system in terms of peak heat release rate and total heat released. Different fire
performance requirements apply depending on the building height, DB and presence of sprinkler
protection. The McDougall House’s height is ≥7 m and ≤25 m, it is located at more than 1.0 m away
from the boundary and with sprinkler protection, these characteristics result in no requirements for the
external wall cladding system. Based on the quantitative and qualitative analyses above, the building
design satisfies Design Scenario (HS).
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                   10 of 23



4.6. Design Scenario (VS): External Vertical Fire Spread
      This design scenario considers the external vertical fire spread of a multi-story building, affecting
the upper floors containing other property, sleeping occupancy or exitway. The fire spread could
occur via openings, unprotected areas, an unprotected lower roof or over the façade materials. Where
building height exceeds 10 m, the design scenario requires specific fire-rated constructions such as
apron and spandrel or the presence of suppression system as solution to fire spread via openings and
unprotected areas. It also allows the assessment of the radiation effect from fire plumes projected from
these openings to demonstrate limited vertical flame spread of no more than 3.5 m. For a lower roof,
the design scenario requires the fire rating to the underside of roof structure or to the higher external
wall, or the presence of a suppression system as a solution. Lastly, where building height exceeds
10 m, it also requires adequate fire performance for the external wall cladding system in terms of the
peak heat release rate and total heat released, or through a standard façade fire test to ensure no more
than a 3.5 m vertical flame spread above the fire source. This design scenario is analyzed qualitatively
by reviewing the building height and fire protection systems of McDougall House. As part of the
fire engineering design, McDougall House is protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system and it
has a building height of less than 10 m. With the building height remaining below the threshold and
sprinkler system being the common solution for most vertical fire spread mechanisms, the building
design satisfies Design Scenario (VS).

4.7. Design Scenario (IS): Rapid Fire Spread Involving Internal Surface Linings
      The design scenario requires the interior surface finishes such as wall and ceiling linings, floorings
and suspended flexible fabrics to achieve adequate fire performance according to recognized test
standards. This design scenario is analyzed qualitatively by reviewing the fire performance achieved
by the new surface finishes and the existing or restored heritage surface finishes. With sprinkler
protection, the requirements are lowered as the benefit of installing a suppression system. For the wall
and ceiling linings, the fire performance is based on a maximum Group Number (GN) rating attained
from standard tests, ISO 5660-1, using small-scale cone calorimeter [19], or ISO 9705, which involves a
full-scale room corner test [20]. The rating ranges from GN1 to GN4 with a higher rating corresponding
to an increased combustibility of the product. For the fire-rated enclosed stair, which is an exitway, the
maximum allowable rating is GN2 while, for other spaces within McDougall House, this is GN3. The
proprietary plasterboard linings exposed on walls and ceilings throughout the building do not exceed
these maximum rating. For floorings, the fire performance is based on a minimum critical radiant flux
for ignition attained from a standard test, ISO 9239-1, using a small-scale radiant panel [21], where
a lower heat flux corresponds to an increased ignitability of the product. The minimum heat flux is
2.2 kW/m2 for the enclosed stair and 1.2 kW/m2 for the other spaces. The new carpet tiles installed
throughout the building exceed these minimum heat fluxes. Through the benefit versus sacrifice
analysis, supported by quantitative smoke and egress modelling, the heritage surface finishes, which
include the restored ornamental plasterwork ceiling in the Ballroom and numerous existing timber
linings throughout, are retained despite having untested fire performance. The benefit versus sacrifice
analysis reveals the importance of adhering to the conservation plan by maintaining the originality
of heritage surface linings in lieu of the fire-retardant treatment of the materials. Subsequently,
quantitative modelling demonstrates that the restored heritage surface finishes do not diminish the
level of fire safety, and details of the analysis are presented in Section 4.9. On these bases, the building
design satisfies Design Scenario (IS).

4.8. Design Scenario (FO): Firefighting Operations
     The design scenario requires adequate provisions to facilitate firefighting and rescue operation in
a building. This design scenario is analyzed qualitatively by reviewing the fire service vehicular access,
means of delivering firefighting water, means of safe access for firefighters, and means of providing
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                11 of 23



clear information to identify the fire location, fire protection systems and any hazardous activities
within the building. For fire service vehicular access, the requirements are hard standing with an
unobstructed path within 20 m of the building and the fire sprinkler inlets. The external carpark on
the northern side of McDougall House, as seen at the top of Figure 5a, provides the hard standing for
the vehicle with unobstructed access to the building and the fire sprinkler inlets (FSI) located by the
eastern side, which is noted on Figure 4a. For means of delivering firefighting water, the requirements
are that the hose run distance from the vehicle does not exceed 75 m or a building fire hydrant system
is installed to NZS 4510:2008 [22]. The measured hose run distance from the vehicle location to any
points within McDougall House is no more than 75 m. For means of safe access where the escape
height is ≤10 m, the requirements are that the hose run distance onto the intermediate floor does not
exceed 75 m and the floor system including its supporting structure have a minimum of 30 min fire
resistance rating. In addition, where the intermediate floor area exceeds 40% of the total firecell floor
area, the floor should be fire-rated for structural adequacy, integrity and insulation. The measured hose
run distance onto the intermediate floor complies, and the floor and its load-bearing walls are designed
to achieve 30 min fire resistance rating. For the means of providing clear information, the existing fire
alarm panel, which is located in the adjacent hospital, is interfaced with the fire protection system of
McDougall House, which includes the analogue addressable smoke detectors, manual call points and
sprinkler system. Together, this forms part of the integrated, site-wide fire protection system. On these
bases, the building design satisfies Design Scenario (FO).

4.9. Design Scenario (CF): Challenging Fire
     The design scenario considers a credible worst-case fire starting in a normally occupied space of
the building, challenging its fire protection systems and threatening the safety of evacuating occupants.
Given sprinkler protection and no possibility of exposing more than 1000 occupants to untenable
conditions, the performance outcome is the fractional effective dose of carbon monoxide, FEDCO not
greater than 0.3 during evacuation, monitored at 2 m above the floor level. However, this requirement
is exempted for the room of fire origin, which meets the following conditions:
1.     Room with floor area less than 2 m2 .
2.     Sanitary facilities adjoining an exitway.
3.     Room with a total floor area of less than 500 m2 , single direction travel of less than 25 m, and
       occupant load of less than 150 or 100 for intermediate floor.
4.     Room with sleeping care use having no more than four occupants undergoing treatment.
     There is no exemption otherwise or for early childhood centers on the upper level and sleeping
use with care or detention. A review of McDougall House shows its individual spaces fall under Items
1–3 above, where Item 1 and 2 have already been explicitly addressed by Design Scenario (UT). For
Item 3, which covers majority of the normally occupied spaces, the design scenario requires a tenable
condition during evacuation to be maintained for the other spaces within the building. This design
scenario is analyzed quantitatively by reviewing the Available Safe Egress Time (ASET) and Required
Safe Egress Time (RSET) to demonstrate the safe evacuation of occupants in the event of a fire, RSET <
ASET. Throughout McDougall House, five design fires in different locations as shown in Figure 6 are
investigated in turn with consideration of their impact on the adjacent spaces:
1.     CF1, Design fire in the Main Lobby/Feature Stair: This fire results in smoke spreading into the
       Ballroom, Corridor and the upper level Passage, which affects egress and challenges the integrity
       of the smoke separation around the Feature Stair.
2.     CF2, Design fire in the Ballroom: This fire results in smoke spreading into the Corridor and
       Main Lobby/Feature Stair, which affects egress and challenges the external egress past heritage
       windows of the Ballroom.
3.     CF3, Design fire in the Corridor: This fire results in smoke spread into the Ballroom, Main
       Lobby/Feature Stair and Safe Path Stair, which affects egress.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                           12 of 23



4.     CF4, Design fire in the Kitchen: This fire results in smoke spreading into the Ballroom and Corridor,
       which affects egress and challenges the external egress past heritage windows of the Kitchen.
5.     CF5, Design fire in the Level 1 Office: This fire results in smoke spreading into the Passage, Main
       Lobby/Feature Stair and Safe Path Stair, which affects egress.




         Figure 6. Design fires and modelled spaces of McDougall House: (a) Ground floor; (b) First floor.

    The rooms of fire origin and selected adjacent spaces which are colored in Figure 6 are modelled
using B-RISK Version 2019.03 [23], a two-layer zone model for smoke modelling with the inherent
assumption that the hot upper layer and the cool lower layer within a compartment is spatially uniform
throughout. The validity of this assumption, and thus the applicability of the zone model for the
                                                                                 .∗
design fire, is dependent on the dimensionless heat release rate, Q , and the shape factor, SF, of the
room of fire origin [24], which are represented by Equations (1) and (2), respectively:
                                                               .
                                              .∗               Q
                                             Q =               √            ,                                    (1)
                                                    ρa cp Ta       gHe5/2

                                                           Af
                                                    SF =           ,                                             (2)
                                                           He2
where ρa = 1.2 kg/m3 , cp = 1.0 kJ/kgK, Ta = 293 K and g = 9.81 m/s2 are constants under ambient
                 .
conditions, Q is the maximum heat release rate within the simulated period, He is the compartment
                                                                                           .∗
ceiling height, and Af is the compartment floor area. For 0.4 ≤ SF ≤ 70 and Q ≤ 0.15, a compartment
                                                                                .∗
is satisfactorily modelled as a two-layer zone. For SF > 70 and Q ≤ 0.15, the original compartment
should be represented as multi-compartments where each compartment is 0.4 ≤ SF ≤ 70. For SF < 0.4,
the compartment should be modelled as a single layer only, unless it is the room of fire origin which
                                                                                .∗
needs to be a two-layer zone. Outside these limits, particularly Q > 0.15, the design fire should be
                                                                                      .∗
investigated using a computational fluid dynamics model. Besides Q and SF, the aspect ratio or
width to length ratio of a compartment is also crucial and this is maintained at no more than 1:5 to
ensure model accuracy. This prevents having a single, excessively long compartment, whereby the
instantaneous formation of a hot upper layer in a zone model becomes less realistic. The applicability
of B-RISK is discussed later in this section for each design fire in conjunction with the respective
RSET/ASET analysis.
     C/VM2 prescribes different fire growth rates based on the building use and its storage height.
For McDougall House, where the storage height is less than 3.0 m, the specified design fire has a
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                      13 of 23



fast, t-squared growth rate. Other characteristics of the design fire including species yields, radiative
fraction, etc., are listed in Table 2, which are also B-RISK model inputs. As part of the fire engineering
design, McDougall House is protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system and automatic smoke
detection and alarm system. The characteristics of a standard response sprinkler head which controls
the design fire upon activation and a point type smoke detector as per Table 2 are included as B-RISK
model inputs. From Figure 6, some of the spaces are non-rectilinear and these are converted into
equivalent volume, rectilinear spaces in B-RISK using Equation (3), which calculates an effective length,
Leff, from the perimeter, P, and floor area, Af , of the space:
                                                            q
                                                    P/2 +       (P/2)2 − 4A f
                                         Le f f =                               ,                             (3)
                                                                 2
this allows the effective width to be deduced from the known floor area of the space. Elongated spaces
such as the Corridor and upper level Passage are modelled as multi-compartments to limit the aspect
ratio to less than 1:5. These spaces are thoroughly open, so full-width and full-height virtual vents are
incorporated to ensure a viable pathway for smoke spread. The compartment sizes modelled are listed
in Table 2. Realistic and reasonable assumptions on ventilation are vital to the tenability assessment
of the simulated spaces. This includes the treatment of internal and external doors, fire and smoke
control doors, wall leakages, and the integrity of wall partitions as described in Table 2.

      Table 2. Characteristics of the design fire, fire protection system, compartment and ventilation for
      simulating design fires of Design Scenario (CF).

          Inputs       Characteristics
                       Growth rate: 0.0469t2
                       Peak value: 20 MW
                       Effective heat of combustion, ∆hc,eff : 20 MJ/kg
                       Radiative fraction, χr : 0.35
       Design fire     Fuel composition: C1 H2 O0.5
                       Soot yield, YS : 0.07 kg/kg (pre-flashover); 0.14 kg/kg (post-flashover)
                       Carbon monoxide yield, YCO : 0.04 kg/kg (pre-flashover); 0.40 kg/kg (post-flashover)
                       Carbon dioxide yield, YCO2 : 1.50 kg/kg
                       Water vapor yield, YH2 O : 0.82 kg/kg
                       Sprinkler: Standard response, controls heat release rate upon activation
                       Response time index, RTI: 135 m1/2 s1/2
                       C-factor: 0.85 m1/2 s1/2
                       Activation temperature, Tact : 68 ◦ C
     Fire protection
                       Radial distance: 3.25 m
         system
                       Distance below ceiling: 0.025 m
                       Smoke detector: Point type
                       Optical density at alarm: 0.097 m−1 , measured outside chamber
                       Radial distance: 7 m
                       Distance below ceiling: 0.025 m
                       Ballroom: 16.22-5.77-3.43 m; SF = 8.0
                       Kitchen: 5.09-2.18-3.43 m; SF = 0.9
                       Level 1 Office: 5.48-5.42-3.00 m; SF = 3.3
                       Level 1 Offices: 15.57-4.12-3.00 m; SF = 7.1
    Compartment 1
                       Corridor: 8.12-1.65-3.43 m (four connected compartments); SF = 1.1
                       Level 1 Passage: 5.38-1.14-3.00 m (three connected compartments); SF = 0.7
                       Main Lobby/Feature Stair: 5.36-1.94-7.14 m; SF = 0.2
                       Safe Path Stair: 3.24-2.60-7.14 m; SF = 0.2
                       Internal doors:
       Ventilation     Non-fire-rated door considered open at all times
                       Fire and/or smoke control door with self-closer considered open during egress only
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                                   14 of 23



                                                           Table 2. Cont.

          Inputs          Characteristics
                          External doors:
                          Closed at all times
                          Door leakage:
                          10-mm gap under fire and/or smoke control door
       Ventilation
                          Wall leakage:
                          Fire- and/or smoke-rated wall has no leakage
                          0.1% leakage area for lined internal and external walls
                          Integrity of wall partitions:
                          Non-fire-rated and smoke-rated walls to fail at 200 ◦ C
      1 Compartment geometry presented as length-width-height for a single room, number of multi-rooms will be

      indicated in brackets.


     Smoke modelling using B-RISK evaluates the tenability of the spaces modelled based on time
when FEDCO reaches 0.3 or ASET. The other part of the RSET/ASET analysis is the evacuation modelling
which determines the evacuation time, RSET, represented by Equation (4) as a function of detection,
notification, pre-movement and egress times:

                                              RSET = tdet + tnot + tpre + tegr ,                                         (4)

the RSET/ASET analysis requires interchanging information between the smoke model and evacuation
model. RSET requires detection time, tdet , attained from the smoke model, while for ASET, the door
opening and closing time during egress as part of B-RISK ventilation input is determined from the
evacuation calculation. McDougall House adopts a standard all-out evacuation strategy. Thus, the
notification time, tnot , is 30 s. Based on the building use as an office and business administration
center and the occupants who are Nurse Maude employees, who are awake, alert and familiar with
the building, their pre-movement time, tpre , are 30 s for the room of fire origin and 60 s for the
adjacent spaces. Egress time, tegr , is governed either by the walking speed, S, and travel distance in an
uncongested scenario, or the flow rate through constriction, Fc , and occupant load when queuing occurs,
whichever is the longer duration. Applying the first order hydraulic calculation [25], Equations (5) and
(6) solve S and Fc , respectively:
                                                S = k − akD,                                            (5)

                                                   Fc = (1 − aD)kDWe ,                                                   (6)

The constants and maximum values associated with the determination of S and Fc are summarized in
Table 3.

                Table 3. Constants and maximum values for walking speed and flow rate calculation.

            Parameters         Values
                               1.4 for horizontal travel
                     k
                               1.0 for vertical travel
                     a         0.266
                               Calculated occupant density of the specific space, P/m2 for S calculation
                     D
                               Assumed occupant density at constriction point, 1.9 P/m2 for Fc calculation
                               Effective width of constriction, which is the original clear width minus the 0.15-m
                 We
                               boundary layer on each side of door and stair
                               Maximum horizontal walking speed, 1.20 m/s
                Smax
                               Maximum vertical walking speed, 0.85 m/s
                               Maximum flow rate for door with self-closer, 50 P/min/leaf
               Fc,max
                               No maximum limit for door without self-closer
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                                15 of 23



      The outcomes from smoke and evacuation modelling enable the assessment of RSET and ASET for
the five design fires proposed. The details of the unfolding chronological events from smoke modelling
and the RSET/ASET analysis performed are presented in Table 4.

      Table 4. Required Safe Egress Time (RSET)/Available Safe Egress Time (ASET) analysis for design fires
      of Design Scenario (CF).

    Design
                     Events
     Fires
                     Design fire in Main Lobby/Feature Stair
                     Adjacent spaces modelled: Ballroom, Corridor and Passage.

                     47 s, smoke detector activation in the Main Lobby/Feature Stair.

                     130 s, failure of smoke separation of the Main Lobby/Feature Stair at 200 ◦ C resulting in
                     immediate smoke spread into upper level Passage.

                     164 s, sprinkler activation to control the heat release rate of design fire at 1261 kW.
                     .∗
                     Q is 0.008 (≤0.15) and SF is 0.2 (<0.4), room of fire origin modelled as two layer and B-RISK is
      CF1            applicable.

                     484 s, FEDCO in the Corridor reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 47 + 30 + 60 + 15 (S governs) = 152 s < 484 s, ASET.

                     582 s, FEDCO in the Ballroom reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 47 + 30 + 60 + 29 (Fc governs) = 166 s < 582 s, ASET.

                     FEDCO in the Passage never reaches 0.3 in 600 s.
                     RSET = 47 + 30 + 60 + 24 (Fc governs) = 161 s < 600 s, ASET.

                     RSET < ASET, occupants evacuate under tenable condition for CF1.
                     Design fire in Ballroom
                     Adjacent spaces modelled: Main Lobby/Feature Stair and Corridor.

                     32 s, smoke detector activation in the Ballroom.

                     167 s, sprinkler activation to control the heat release rate of design fire at 1308 kW.
                     .∗
                     Q is 0.054 (≤0.15) and SF is 8.0 (≥0.4, ≤70), room of fire origin modelled as two layer and B-RISK
                     is applicable.

                     251 s, non-fire-rated wall partitions of the Ballroom reaches 200 ◦ C.
                     The failure of the non-fire-rated wall partitions at 200 ◦ C would cause immediate smoke to
                     spread into the Corridor and Main Lobby/Feature Stair. Consequently, the tenability within
      CF2            these spaces will deteriorate. However, wall failure is not modelled to generate a worst-case
                     condition within the Ballroom for the assessment of external egress past windows.

                     251 s, smoke spread into the Corridor.
                     RSET = 32 + 30 + 60 + 15 (S governs) = 137 s < 251 s, ASET.

                     251 s, smoke spread into the Main Lobby/Feature Stair.
                     RSET = 32 + 30 + 60 + 17 (S governs) = 139 s < 251 s, ASET.

                     408 s, FEDCO in the Ballroom reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 32 + 30 + 60 + 44 (Fc governs) = 166 s < 408 s, ASET. This is the evacuation time for the
                     last Level 1 occupant to evacuate externally past the Ballroom windows.

                     RSET < ASET, occupants evacuate under a tenable condition for CF2.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                                 16 of 23



                                                        Table 4. Cont.

    Design
                     Events
     Fires
                     Design fire in Corridor
                     Adjacent spaces modelled: Main Lobby/Feature Stair, Safe Path Stair and Ballroom.

                     35 s, smoke detector activation in the Corridor.

                     151 s, sprinkler activation to control the heat release rate of design fire at 1069 kW.
                     .∗
                     Q is 0.044 (≤0.15) and SF is 0.9 (≥0.4, ≤70), room of fire origin modelled as two layer and B-RISK
                     is applicable.

                     166 s, non-fire-rated wall partitions of the Corridor reaches 200 ◦ C.
                     The failure of the non-fire-rated wall partitions at 200 ◦ C would cause immediate smoke to
                     spread into the Ballroom and Main Lobby/Feature Stair, and also other adjacent spaces which are
      CF3            not modelled. Consequently, the tenability within these spaces will deteriorate. However, wall
                     failure is not modelled to generate a worst-case condition for smoke spread into the Safe Path
                     Stair.

                     166 s, smoke spread into the Main Lobby/Feature Stair.
                     RSET = 35 + 30 + 60 + 17 (S governs) = 142 s < 166 s, ASET.

                     166 s, smoke spread into the Ballroom.
                     RSET = 35 + 30 + 60 + 29 (Fc governs) = 154 s < 166 s, ASET.

                     FEDCO in the Safe Path Stair never reaches 0.3 in 600 s.
                     RSET = 35 + 30 + 60 + 40 (Fc governs) = 165 s < 600 s, ASET.

                     RSET < ASET, occupants evacuate under a tenable condition for CF3.
                     Design fire in Kitchen
                     Adjacent spaces modelled: Ballroom and Corridor.

                     54 s, smoke detector activation in the Corridor.
                     Smoke detector is not installed within the Kitchen due to risk of false alarm.

                     95 s, failure of non-fire-rated wall partitions of the Kitchen at 200 ◦ C resulting in immediate
                     smoke spread into the Ballroom and Corridor.

                     156 s, sprinkler activation to control the heat release rate of design fire at 1141 kW.
                     .∗
                     Q is 0.047 (≤0.15) and SF is 0.9 (≥0.4, ≤70), room of fire origin modelled as two layer and B-RISK
                     is applicable.

                     227 s, fire becomes ventilation limited.
      CF4            This requires the failure of the Kitchen window to maintain the capped heat release rate.
                     However, window failure is not modelled to prevent smoke outflow and to generate a
                     worst-case condition within the Kitchen for the assessment of external egress past window.

                     317 s, FEDCO in the Kitchen reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 54 + 30 + 60 + 44 (Fc governs) = 188 s < 317 s, ASET. This is the evacuation time for the
                     last Level 1 occupant to evacuate externally past the Kitchen window.

                     328 s, FEDCO in the Corridor reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 54 + 30 + 60 + 15 (S governs) = 159 s < 328 s, ASET.

                     333 s, FEDCO in the Ballroom reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 54 + 30 + 60 + 29 (Fc governs) = 173 s < 333 s, ASET.

                     RSET < ASET, occupants evacuate under a tenable condition for CF4.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                                     17 of 23



                                                         Table 4. Cont.

    Design
                     Events
     Fires
                     Design fire in Level 1 Office
                     Adjacent spaces modelled: Passage, Main Lobby/Feature Stair, Safe Path Stair and Level 1 Offices.

                     31 s, smoke detector activation in the Level 1 Office.

                     113 s, failure of non-fire-rated wall partitions of the Level 1 Office at 200 ◦ C, resulting in
                     immediate smoke to spread into the Passage and Main Lobby/Feature Stair.

                     121 s, fire and smoke control door into the Safe Path Stair is opened for egress allowing the
                     ingress of smoke from the Passage.

                     137 s, sprinkler activation to control the heat release rate of design fire at 880 kW.
                     .∗
                     Q is 0.051 (≤ 0.15) and SF is 3.3 (≥0.4, ≤70), room of fire origin modelled as two layer and
                     B-RISK is applicable.

                     145 s, fire and smoke control door into the Safe Path Stair, which is closed as the last Level 1
      CF5            occupant evacuates.

                     155 s, fire becomes ventilation limited.
                     This requires the failure of the Level 1 Office window to maintain the capped heat release rate.
                     However, window failure is not modelled to prevent smoke outflow, which will alleviate the
                     tenability within the modelled compartments.

                     331 s, FEDCO in the Passage reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 31 + 30 + 60 + 24 (Fc governs) = 145 s < 331 s, ASET.

                     337 s, FEDCO in the Main Lobby/Feature Stair reaches 0.3.
                     RSET = 31 + 30 + 60 + 17 (S governs) = 138 s < 337 s, ASET.

                     FEDCO in the Safe Path Stair never reaches 0.3 in 600 s.
                     RSET = 31 + 30 + 60 + 40 (Fc governs) = 161 s < 600 s, ASET.

                     RSET < ASET, occupants evacuate under a tenable condition for CF5.


      The ventilation characteristics described in Table 2 promote internal smoke spread to adjacent
spaces modelled and reduce smoke outflow to outside with the aim of generating a worst-case condition
within the simulated compartments. These include treating external doors and any internal doors to
spaces excluded from the model as closed, simulating under door leakage for normally closed fire
and/or smoke control doors, treating internal non-fire-rated doors between modelled spaces as open
at all times, and simulating wall leakage between compartments. From Table 4, certain ventilation
characteristics are not simulated such as the failure of exterior windows and non-fire-rated wall
partitions. The intention is to generate worst-case FEDCO for a specific space or scenario of interest.
For instance, to investigate the tenability of external egress past windows, one of the requirements
is to maintain a tenable condition within the room of fire origin when the last occupant evacuates
externally past its windows. Therefore, in CF2 and CF4, the failure of non-fire-rated wall partitions of
the Ballroom and exterior window of the Kitchen have not been simulated to prevent smoke outflow,
ensuring worst-case condition for these rooms of fire origin. In order to challenge the egress via the
Safe Path Stair, similarly in CF3, the failure of the non-fire-rated partition of the Corridor has not been
simulated to channel more smoke flow into the stair.
      Ventilation modelling depends on the provided guidelines and mandated performance outcomes
from the building code, and also the interpretation of the designer to achieve a conservative RSET/ASET
analysis. Changes in ventilation have a varying impact on the performance outcomes, and often,
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                   18 of 23



sensitivity analysis is performed to understand the extent of such impact. For CF5, the effect from the
failure to one of the windowpane is investigated. At ventilation limit, a 1.20 m by 2.08-m window is
simulated to fail, which maintains the fire’s capped heat release rate throughout as seen in Figure 7
when compared with the scenario where the window stays in place. Due to the sustained heat release
rate, a higher upper layer temperature within the simulated compartments is achieved in the simulation
with window failure, as seen in Figure 8.




                     Figure 7. Heat release rate of CF5 with and without window failure.




      Figure 8. Upper layer temperature for compartments of CF5: (a) With window failure; (b) Without
      window failure.

     The higher upper layer temperature generates more severe thermal radiation on the egressing
occupants in terms of the fractional effective dose of thermal effects, FEDtherm . Table 5 compares the time
to FEDCO and FEDtherm , reaching 0.3 for CF5 with and without failure of the window. The comparison
shows the impact of increased ventilation from the failed window, notably causing FEDtherm within
the Passage to exceed 0.3 which otherwise would not have occurred. Consequently, the outflow of
smoke through the failed window greatly improves the tenability in terms of FEDCO for the adjacent
spaces. Lastly, given C/VM2 requirements that FEDCO is the only performance criterion assessed for
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                   19 of 23



building with sprinkler protection and with no possibility of exposing more than 1000 occupants to
untenable conditions, the scenario without a failed window is more conservative for McDougall House.
However, for the scenario with over 1000 exposed occupants, the changes in ventilation might trigger
a more onerous tenability condition in relation to the thermal effects as demonstrated.

      Table 5. Time of FEDCO and FEDtherm reaching 0.3 (in seconds) for modelled spaces of CF5 with and
      without window failure.

                     Scenario            Compartment            FEDCO = 0.3        FEDtherm = 0.3
                                         Level 1 Office              549                110
                                        Level 1 Offices             >600               >600
                                           Passage 1                >600                176
             With window failure           Passage 2                >600                282
                                           Passage 3                >600                388
                                    Main Lobby/Feature Stair        >600                188
                                        Safe Path Stair             >600               >600
                                         Level 1 Office              296                110
                                        Level 1 Offices              508               >600
                                           Passage 1                 331                172
           Without window failure          Passage 2                 389               >600
                                           Passage 3                 454               >600
                                    Main Lobby/Feature Stair         337                187
                                        Safe Path Stair             >600               >600


      The outcomes of the quantitative RSET/ASET analysis are also utilized in a qualitative manner
to assess a few other aspects of the building design, particularly those relating to cultural heritage,
which comply with NZBC under ANARP basis. As per C/VM2 requirement, the fire resistance rating
of the Safe Path Stair is designed to be greater than at least three times the longest evacuation time
of the building. According to Table 4, this is 188 s for the evacuation past the Kitchen window, so
the minimum fire resistance rating is 10 min. Based on available proprietary fire-rated wall systems,
the 30 min fire-rated plasterboard wall system utilizing the existing lath substrate is specified for
the Safe Path Stair. As mentioned in Section 2, the original lath and plaster walls were extensively
damaged where some were required to be fire-rated to support the upper level. The damaged walls
were replaced by (1) proprietary fire-rated plasterboard wall systems with new timber frame, (2) new
plasterboards on the existing lath substrate or (3) a composite wall of heritage timber panels on lath
and plaster with mineral wool in cavity on one side and a new plasterboard wall on the other. The first
type of wall systems is a tested solution, while the latter two are specified after consultation with the
manufacturer, who advised that these can achieve an equivalent performance as the available fire-rated
plasterboard wall systems.
      The conservation plan of McDougall House aims to restore the heritage interior surface finishes
without further fire-retardant treatment, which if applied can have an adverse effect on the materials’
appearance due to product compatibility and might not be a cost-effective solution. The ornamental
plasterwork ceiling in the Ballroom has been restored with repair to the cracks and the installation
of concealed sprinkler pipework and heads above the ceiling. The ceiling was also slightly lowered
to accommodate the 30 min fire-rated plasterboard floor system above. The original heritage timber
skirting, paneling, trims, etc., have also been restored throughout the building. In order to retain these
heritage surface linings with unknown fire performance, the fire engineering design assumes a fire
starting on the heritage surface linings would have equivalent severity as the design fires specified.
Although not required under Design Scenario (CF), RSET/ASET analysis is carried out for the room
of fire origin to demonstrate fire starting on the heritage surface linings will not result in untenable
condition for the egressing occupants. Table 6 shows the RSET/ASET analysis for the room of fire
origin of the design fires proposed.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                        20 of 23



               Table 6. RSET/ASET analysis for room of fire origin containing heritage surface linings.

                     Design Fires     Room of Fire Origin          RSET         ASET (FEDCO = 0.3)
                         CF1        Main Lobby/Feature Stair        154                  419
                         CF2               Ballroom                 151                  408
                         CF3               Corridor                 140                  392
                         CF4                Kitchen                 147                  317
                         CF5             Level 1 Office             127                  296


     As RSET < ASET, the occupants can evacuate the room of fire origin under tenable conditions
from a fire starting on the heritage surface lining. This is primarily due to the early warning provided
by the new smoke detection system, which initiates the evacuation at an earlier time. The results of CF2
and CF4 in Table 4 have demonstrated safe external egress past the Ballroom and Kitchen windows
and, as an added level of safety, the fire engineering design has incorporated quick response sprinkler
heads local to these windows to provide a more rapid response in the event of a fire. Based on the
quantitative and qualitative analyses above, the building design satisfies Design Scenario (CF).

4.10. Design Scenario (RC): Robustness Check
     This design scenario applies to spaces containing more than 150 people where the failure of a
key fire safety system could expose the occupants to untenable conditions during fire. The design
scenario considers the sequential failure of any fire protection and fire safety features, which relies
on a mechanical or electronic component to be activated during fire. These include an automatic
smoke control system, fire and smoke control door, curtain and other similar closures. However, an
exemption applies to fire sprinkler systems and automatic fire alarm systems installed to recognized
standards. Also, in a sprinkler-protected building, an exemption applies to the fire and smoke control
doors equipped with an electromagnetic hold-open device installed to recognized standards which can
be activated by the fire alarm system to close these doors. This design scenario is analyzed qualitatively
by reviewing the fire protection systems of McDougall House. As part of the fire engineering design,
McDougall House is protected by the sprinkler system installed to NZS 4541:2013 and considered
to be sufficiently reliable, and the fire and smoke control doors are equipped with electromagnetic
hold-open devices connected to the fire alarm. The total occupant load of the building is 95, less than
the threshold of 150, and there are no other key fire safety systems identified. Thus, on these bases, the
building design satisfies Design Scenario (RC).

5. Upgrades to the Fire Safety and Fire Protection Systems of McDougall House
      The application of C/VM2, coupled with ANARP considerations for the heritage fabrics has
enabled the refurbishment of McDougall House, both externally and internally, to be carried out
according to the conservation plan. As a result, the majority of the cultural heritage values are
retained such as the exterior architectural design and the interior ornamental timber and plasterwork
linings. The performance-based fire engineering design results in an upgrade to the fire safety and fire
protection systems of the building, and Table 7 compares the existing and upgraded conditions.
      In summary, the performance-based fire engineering design improves the level of fire safety of the
building and enhances its heritage value with a new smoke detection system, heritage sympathetic
fire protection systems, e.g., concealed sprinkler pipework and heads, and new fire-rated floors and
walls completed with compatible fire-stopping products. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses
are required in ensuring that the fire engineering design is compliant with NZBC and also satisfies the
heritage conservation requirements.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                           21 of 23



      Table 7. Existing and upgraded conditions of the fire safety and fire protection systems of McDougall
      House.

       Fire
 Safety/Protection                      Existing                                     Upgraded
     Systems
                                                                    Concealed sprinkler pipework above
                       Exposed sprinkler pipework under
                                                                    ceiling, particularly for the ornamental
                       ceiling.
                                                                    plasterwork ceiling of Ballroom.
                                                                    Combination of standard and quick
   Automatic fire      Combination of outdated brass pendant
                                                                    response sprinkler heads with concealed
  sprinkler system     sprinkler heads and standard response
                                                                    type installed within the Ballroom, Main
                       sprinkler heads.
                                                                    Lobby and Boardroom.
                                                                    Fire hose reel located within recessed
                       Exposed fire hose reel mounted on wall.
                                                                    cabinet on the wall.
                       Manual alarm system with                     Automatic analogue addressable smoke
                       supplementary smoke detection.               detection system with manual call points.
 Fire alarm system
                                                                    Electronic sounder with compliant alarm
                       Outdated bell-type sounder.
                                                                    signature.
                      Absence of fire and smoke control doors
                                                                    Fire and smoke control doors -/30/30 sm
                      within the designated fire and smoke
                                                                    rating leading into the fire-rated Safe Path
                      separations of the fire-rated Safe Path
                                                                    Stair at ground and first floors.
                      Stair.
                       Absence of smoke control doors within        Smoke control doors -/-/- sm rating within
 Fire and/or smoke     the designated smoke separations at first    the first-floor smoke separation of the
    control door       floor of the Feature Stair.                  Feature Stair.
                       Absence of smoke seals, door closers,        Fire and/or smoke control doors equipped
                       electromagnetic hold-open devices and        with smoke seals, door closers,
                       certified door tags for the fire and/or      electromagnetic hold-open devices and
                       smoke control doors.                         certified door tags.
                                                                    Fire-rated plasterboard timber joist floor
                       No fire rating to the first floor and its    and ceiling system, achieving 30 min fire
                       load-bearing walls and structural steel      rating for exposure from the underside.
                       elements due to earthquake damage to
                                                                    Fire-rated plasterboard wall system
                       the floor and wall linings.
                                                                    utilizing an existing lath substrate or new
                                                                    timber frame, or a composite wall,
                                                                    achieving 30 min fire rating with fire
                                                                    exposure from all sides.

       Fire- and                                                    Fire-rated plasterboard timber-framed
     smoke-rated                                                    system encapsulating structural steel
     construction                                                   elements, achieving 30 min fire rating with
                                                                    fire exposure from all sides.
                                                                    Fire-rated plasterboard timber-framed
                       No fire rating to the fire-rated Safe Path   ceiling system to underside of stair,
                       Stair and storage cupboard under stair       achieving 30 min fire rating for exposure
                       due to earthquake damage to its wall         from the underside.
                       linings.                                     Fire-rated plasterboard wall system
                                                                    utilizing an existing lath substrate,
                                                                    achieving 30 min fire rating for exposure
                                                                    from either side.
                       No fire rating to the existing chimney       Fire-rated plasterboard timber-framed shaft
                       voids due to the removal of chimneys           system, achieving 30 min fire rating for
                       following earthquake damage.                          exposure from either side.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                             22 of 23



                                                     Table 7. Cont.

       Fire
 Safety/Protection                        Existing                                      Upgraded
     Systems
                                                                       Proprietary fire-stopping products
         Fire- and                                                     including fire-rated collars and wraps,
                         No fire-stopping service penetrations
       smoke-rated                                                     fire-rated intumescent mastic, fire-rated
                         through fire-rated floor and walls.
       construction                                                    mineral batts, etc., installed to maintain the
                                                                       fire rating of the floor and walls.
                         Outdated emergency lighting model with
                         limited coverage (no coverage where           Emergency lighting coverage, design and
                         there is a change in level, e.g., Feature     construction details meeting NZBC
        Emergency
                         Stair and external ramps), not complying      requirements.
     lighting and exit
                         with NZBC requirements.
          signage
                         Combination of illuminated exit signage
                                                                       Illuminated exit signage coverage, design
                         and outdated non-illuminated exit
                                                                       and construction details meeting NZBC
                         signage, not complying with NZBC
                                                                       requirements.
                         requirements.


Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.P., C.D. and C.F.; methodology, D.P. and C.D.; software, D.P.;
validation, D.P., C.D. and C.F.; formal analysis, D.P.; investigation, D.P.; resources, D.P.; data curation, D.P.;
writing—original draft preparation, D.P.; writing—review and editing, D.P., C.D. and C.F.; visualization, D.P.;
supervision, C.D. and C.F.; project administration, D.P.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge Murray Hendy (Nurse Maude Association), Brady
Cosgrove and Mark Taylor (Cosgroves Ltd.), William Fulton (Fulton Ross Team Architects), Stephen Barrow (Lewis
and Barrow Ltd.), Daryl Partridge (Trengrove Architects Ltd.), Armitage Williams Construction and Alexander
Turnbull Library for the contribution to project information.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.      ICOMOS. New Zealand Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural Heritage Value; ICOMOS NZ (Inc.):
        Auckland, New Zealand, 2010.
2.      Duncan, C.R.; Whiting, P.; Wade, C.A.; Whiting, D.; Henderson, A. Fire Protection of New Zealand’s Traditional
        Māori Buildings; BRANZ: Porirua, New Zealand, 2004.
3.      Cosgroves Ltd. McDougall House Fire Strategy Report; Issue D; Cosgroves Ltd.: Christchurch, New Zealand,
        2014.
4.      Fulton Ross Team Architects. McDougall House Heritage Report; Fulton Ross Team Architects: Christchurch,
        New Zealand, 2013.
5.      Pau, D.; Duncan, C.; Fleischmann, C. Fire Protection and Fire Safety Design of New Zealand Heritage
        Building. Fire Science and Technology 2018. In Proceedings of the 11th Asia-Oceania Symposium on Fire Science
        and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, 21–25 October 2018; Springer: Singapore.
6.      Lewis & Barrow Ltd. McDougall House Earthquake Assessment; Lewis & Barrow Ltd.: Christchurch, New
        Zealand, 2012.
7.      Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. C/VM2 Verification Method: Framework for Fire Safety
        Design; Amendment 5; Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment: Wellington, New Zealand, 2017.
8.      Building Act 2004. Available online: http://legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2004/0072/144.0/DLM306036.html
        (accessed on 5 June 2019).
9.      Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. Extract from the New Zealand Building Code; Ministry of
        Business, Innovation and Employment: Wellington, New Zealand, 2012.
10.     Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. C/AS1-C/AS7 Acceptable Solutions; Amendment 4; Ministry
        of Business, Innovation and Employment: Wellington, New Zealand, 2017.
Safety 2019, 5, 45                                                                                         23 of 23



11.   Wade, C.; Beever, P.; Fleischmann, C.; Lester, J.; Lloydd, D.; Moule, A.; Saunders, N.; Thorby, P. Developing
      Fire Performance Criteria for New Zealand’s Performance Based Building Code. In Proceedings of the Fire
      Safety Engineering International Seminar, Paris, France, 26–27 April 2007.
12.   Fleischmann, C.M. Is Prescription the Future of Performance-Based Design? Fire Safety Science.
      In Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Fire Safety Science, College Park, MD, USA,
      19–24 June 2011.
13.   National Fire Protection Association. Performance-Based Option. In NFPA 101 Life Safety Code; 2018 ed.;
      National Fire Protection Association: Quincy, MA, USA, 2018; Chapter 5; pp. 44–48.
14.   Australian Building Codes Board. International Fire Engineering Guidelines; 2005 ed.; Australian Building
      Codes Board: Canberra, Australia, 2005.
15.   Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers. CIBSE. Guide E: Fire Engineering, 2nd ed.; Chartered
      Institution of Building Services Engineers: London, UK, 2003.
16.   Standards New Zealand. NZS 4512:2010 Fire Detection and Alarm Systems in Buildings; Standards New
      Zealand: Wellington, New Zealand, 2010.
17.   Standards New Zealand. NZS 4541:2013 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems; Standards New Zealand: Wellington,
      New Zealand, 2013.
18.   Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. Commentary for Building Code Clauses C1-C6 and Verification
      Method C/VM2; Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment: Wellington, New Zealand, 2013.
19.   International Organization for Standardization. ISO 5660-1:2015 Reaction-to-Fire Tests—Heat Release, Smoke
      Production and Mass Loss Rate—Part 1: Heat Release Rate (Cone Calorimeter Method) and Smoke Production Rate
      (Dynamic Measurement), 3rd ed.; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.
20.   International Organization for Standardization. ISO 9705-1:2016 Reaction to Fire Tests—Room Corner Test for
      Wall and Ceiling Lining Products—Part 1: Test Method for a Small Room Configuration, 1st ed.; International
      Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2016.
21.   International Organization for Standardization. ISO 9239-1:2010 Reaction to Fire Tests for Floorings—Part 1:
      Determination of the Burning Behaviour Using a Radiant Heat Source, 3rd ed.; International Organization for
      Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2010.
22.   Standards New Zealand. NZS 4510:2008 Fire Hydrant Systems for Buildings; Standards New Zealand:
      Wellington, New Zealand, 2008.
23.   Wade, C.; Baker, G.; Frank, K.; Harrison, R.; Spearpoint, M. B-RISK 2016 User Guide and Technical Manual, 3rd
      ed.; BRANZ: Porirua, New Zealand, 2016.
24.   Wade, C.A. Room Size Limits when Using a Fire Zone Model for Smoke-Filing Calculations; BRANZ: Porirua, New
      Zealand, 2013.
25.   Gwynne, S.M.V.; Rosenbaum, E.R. Employing the Hydraulic Model in Assessing Emergency Movement.
      In SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, 5th ed.; Hurley, M.J., Daniel, G., Eds.; Springer: New York,
      NY, USA, 2016; pp. 2115–2151.

                        © 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                        article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                        (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
